According to Dzogchen teachings that we went through many times, Dzogchen teachings, our
nature of the mind is totally enlightened being. Our nature of the mind is totally enlightened.
It has all enlightened qualities. Not just only our mind, but every living nature is totally
enlightened, totally great natural status. Dzogchen teachings, as we talked about in
Dzogchen teachings, has three Dzogchens, as I think I've mentioned many times. Again, I talked
about it. The foundational Dzogchen, the path Dzogchen, and then the result Dzogchen. Generally,
these three Dzogchens, the ground, path, and result Dzogchen, they're not different, three
different locations. It's all teaching, pointing to the one nature, to our nature of the mind.
But however, we didn't have, even we have the own, Buddhas already enlightened status,
we've not discovered, not yet discovered. In order to discover that nature, the greatest teacher,
Buddha explained more thoroughly how to reveal this nature, and to make sure that we're not really
again lost in the directions. That's the reason Buddha taught this ground, path, and the result.
Ground is, as he said, already enlightened. It is right here. Ground, in that point,
ground is resolved. Resolved ground is no difference. Path also comes from this ground.
This is no difference, actually reality. This is all here. But for the duality of the mind,
we sense so distracted by duality, carried the force of duality outside, outskirt. So now we
are returning back to our dominion, our nature. Then it's good to have this way to explain. That's
what the teaching makes of that. So, the path. Path is, then what? This path is Dzogchen teaching,
first you have to receive the instructions. Even though nature is right here, but you should
receive the instructions, and the empowerment, and the teachings, teachings, those are all we
received.
Once we came to the application of the Dzoketi, the path, the Dzoketi, path, path practices,
and then this Dzoketi has two techniques, that we all know. Gada-tikkyu, tikkyu,
pure from the beginning techniques, and the thunder-pogol, saplanten is keeping our techniques,
these two techniques. First, these both are nature of the mind. One is, tikkyu is more
natural of the emptiness aspect of the nature of the mind, and the togal is more
emphasizing on the clarity aspect of our own natural mind. Both are nature of the mind.
But first, since we are so carried by the force of the duality and the destructive,
therefore the emptiness aspect of the nature of the mind is more practical for us to emphasize
on that. From that, when we discover the emptiness aspect of the clear nature of the mind,
that will saplanten is discovering the clarity aspect of the nature of the mind. So that's why
the great masters often emphasize on the tikkyu meditation. That's the main word, tikkyu.
Many of you already know tikkyu means cutting thoroughly. What cutting thoroughly means what
we're cutting? Cutting thoroughly all the duality consultations. Duality consultations
instantly without any trace, without any laptop, instantly. So cutting thoroughly. And tikkyu is,
when we practice tikkyu, is any nature of our mind. As in this teaching mentioned,
all those different teachings, the practice, everything, all is so good. But yet, when you
look into the point of zuki teaching, this really weird kind of little bit detour, kind of dev
iating.
But zuki is the most ultimate nature of the mind. And that is our inner nature of the mind,
your inner nature of the mind. The nature of our mind, or your mind, or my mind,
the nature of the mind, is free from all the observations. All the observations,
free from the two egos, phenomena ego and individual ego, is free from those two egos.
Two obstacles, even there are no names of these two egos. There are even no names of the
observations. It's free from the beginning. That's why zuki terminology used so many times,
free from the beginning. This is not just storytelling. Truly, our nature of the mind
is free from the beginning. It's like open billion skies. Yet, this nature contains all the
enlightened qualities. That also enlightened qualities, all a spontaneous, without any effort.
That we don't have to make any effort. If something that we have to bring with effort,
that is provocation. That is a component. That is not natural. Then it will become
impermanent. But zuki realization is truly our last realization when we achieve that.
We return back to our origin domain. We deviated from this origin with duality
consumption, carried forth by the duality in a far way. Nature is never changed. So it's built
from the beginning. That status. That is what really led us. We did that and then practicing
of these two. Those are two practices. Many of you already received a lot of instructions and
teachings. I had also opportunity many times to write all those teachings. So now, really
practice. That to do practices, again, really the same thing. At the beginning time, we should,
even though it's built from the beginning, the beginning is already here. But to discover that
in nature, we have to be more practical. We have to follow the exact instructions as teaching. We
're
full of those instructions, full of devotion, joy, appreciation, and courage, and commitment,
and practicing with respect and appreciation, and then take raffles and develop the body together,
and then meditate. Meditation also talking two different meditations. Even the origin nature is
built from the beginning is totally in life state. We have already here, but yet we don't have that
.
Our mind is because when we start meditating, our mind is always so, so busy, so distracted,
so easily distracted. In many cases, even one minute, maybe hardly to believe,
our mind is safe, hardly stay in stillness. I mean, we experience, you know that. How that
mind, that is how, that means our mind is so distracted. It is always running as like wind
outside, like wind. Really, so much for that reason. And shamatha is very important.
Even though shamatha meditation is the foundation of the zoki meditation. Zoki meditation is vipash
ana,
the ultimate vipashana.
Vipashana, but shamatha meditation with good postures, relaxing good postures,
and with good postures, and feel strong presence of the old, the lineage master,
particularly in Gharbhe Masambhava, is separable with your root teacher, whoever your that may be.
Really feel in one, in Gharbhe Masambhava, in body, your root teacher. In Buddhism,
particularly in zoki teaching, already in teaching, always emphasize on that root teacher. Because
the root teacher, you know, in teaching, is that one who gives you the empowerment, one that will
explain the meaning of the teachings, or the empowerment of teaching, and give it a bit of
attraction. Especially, those are known as three levels that you, who matured, or trying to mature
your, our own beings. And that is called root teachers in the teaching mission. But whoever you
feel strongly connected, even though that's not happened, that who connected, feel that embodiment,
Gharbhe Masambhava, embodiment that is strongly connected, do the kind of prayer, such a
seven-line prayer, and receiving the kind of, so many blessings, and Gharbhe Masambhava finally
merge, dissolve to you, and then, you know, to you, to your own nature of the mind, and then med
itate
that with the samatha. Trying to relax your mind, hold, follow the breathing, or concentrate on the
Buddha images, right, in front of you, and how long we can concentrate on the Buddha image, or how
long
we can watch the breathing. How many times? Five times? Ten times? Repeated that. That was also
known
as timing the mind. "Tame your mind," the greatest teaching Buddha said. What does that mean? It
means
time for mind, destructive mind, wild mind with emotions, calm down to the subtle states,
calm and physical states. When the mind is tamed, then we begin to, our soil, our area is really
perfectly beautiful. Then the Vipassana can grow so beautiful, and the Zokki meditation comes
beautifully, and meditating, then trying to meditate on the Zokki status, Zokki, Zokkin, or med
itate on
the Zokki, Zokkin, Zokkin. So this is, and then here he said, "Explain the required
actualization of the insight and the primordial business."
It's the Buddha, samatha Buddha, is free from abandoning and attainments. And that means what,
I think I mentioned already, the enlightenment, the Buddhahood, or the enlightenment is right with
us,
so it's not something that we have to grab. It's free from, as SNA said, free from attainment and
abandon and attainment. There's nothing went away. And when we regain our own reality and nature of
the what we gain, it's really achieving that. That is the Buddhahood, so it's really right here,
here, so it's right here. And then continuing that this is the completion and the essence and
nature of the path of the samsara nirvana. So this all, like everything.
Maybe now we stop here, and I think we stop here.